And I presume Todd,
the woke banking bill got its extension.
It did
much of a discussion, not much of a discussion.
No. Along the
right.
We are live streaming now. Uh, thank you members. Thank you.
Um, submitters officials, members of the public.
Um, we are now going into, uh, the, a continuation
of our public submissions on the taxation annual rates
for 25, 26, compliance, simplification,
and remedial measures.
Um, bill, and first up we have, um,
the corporate taxpayers group.
Thank you. Thank you, Sue.
I understand this is a, um,
what we call a hybrid presentation.
Have we've one of your colleagues online? Oh, yes, we have.
Yes. Good morning. Good Morning. Good morning. Okay.
You've got 10 minutes, so, uh, we're in your hands.
I'll hand over to Vivian.
Great. Thank you. Um, so good morning.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today on behalf
of the Corporate taxpayers group.
Sure. Um, my name is Vivian Lee.
I'm a member of the group
and, um, with me, we're in the room with you,
is Patrick Kelman an advisor to the group?
So there was a bit about the group in the submission,
but in summary, the corporate taxpayers group is an
independent tax think tank,
representing 50 major New Zealand companies across a diverse
range of industries, as you know, tax
and finance professionals
that are really embedded in New Zealand's kind
of tax system every day.
Our goal is to bring a practical private sector perspective
to tax reform, and we work closely with Inland Revenue
and Treasury to help shape policy.
So the group believes
that a good tax system in New Zealand is built
around a few key principles, um, high certainty
and low business risk, low compliance costs,
which is something we are pleased
to see driving several changes in the bill, um,
international competitiveness and positive change.
So with that in mind, we'd like
to offer some brief comments on the bill.
Um, and we've chosen kind of five categories
to draw out in particular.
So firstly is around remedials.
There are a number of remedials in this tax bill,
and we support a transparent
and well-resourced remedial process.
Tax legislation is inevitably complex
and we'll always need to undertake remedial changes.
So it is important that resources are allocated
to this every year.
So it's great to see this bill put so much focus on,
you know, fixing those small irritations.
Secondly, on fringe benefit tax, um,
we support the amendment allowing open loop gift cards
to be taxed under FPT rather than PAYE.
This corrects a recent inland revenue tax council office
interpretation that disrupted longstanding practice
and created confusion
and significant compliance costs for employers, many
of whom decided to stop purchasing open loop gift cards
altogether just to be safe.
However, the current drafting may also unintentionally
increase compliance costs by creating a new category
of benefit for gift cards.
We recommend keeping gift cards as unclassified benefits
to avoid unnecessary system changes.
We also want to flag a recent interpretation issue
related to FBT.
So the tax council office has recently interpreted that
personal protective equipment like steel capped boots
and high vis gear, is a fringe benefit,
and they don't qualify for the health
and safety FPT exemption,
meaning employers must pay tax on the provision
of such items to employees.
The group considers this interpretation to, you know,
not really be, not really make sense.
No employee would expect to have to self-fund the purchase
of this sort of PPE
and would not typically view the receipt of steel cap boots
or high-vis gears, a benefit received.
So we recommend that this bill is used
to tidy up this problem.
Thirdly, on the repeal of section 17 gb, in contrast
to some other submitters, we strongly support the repeal
of section 17 GB of the Tax Administration Act.
It was introduced under urgency, used only once,
and created unease about inland revenue's role in
politically sensitive matters.
So the reasons we support the repeal are
that the New Zealand tax system is built on voluntary
compliance, and most often taxpayers will supply
information voluntarily.
For example, the group regularly collates information across
our membership and supplies this to officials to assist
with policy development.
For anyone who doesn't voluntarily, um, comply,
inland revenue already has the power to ask
for information related to a person's tax affairs.
In fact, in 2022 inland revenue release draft guidance on
how the provision should be applied, that guidance was, um,
never finalized, indicating
that in the revenue itself wasn't clear about all the legal
hoops needed to jump through to actually use the rule,
or they're too onerous to use in practice, if the law was
to be re retained, um,
additional remedial laws would be required to ensure
that taxpayers are entitled to a tax deduction
for their costs of complying with substantial requests.
So we think that repealing this section is a necessary step
to restore trust in the tax system,
fourthly, on unclaimed money.
So we understand the intent by behind the proposed changes
to the unclaimed money rules, which is
to help reunite people with their funds.
But some of the new data requirements such as, um,
date the account was opened
or date of the last interaction
may not readily be available.
One example is if an account was opened many years before
and the data wasn't required
to be kept under business record laws,
this becomes more critical when businesses are, you know,
changing or upgrading financial systems
and don't want to have to maintain the cost
of keeping access and information and legacy systems.
So we understand that information is only required if it
exists or is readily available.
So we recommend
that Inland revenue release practical guidance to clarify
what they mean by this.
It would also be good to see Inland revenue use the data
that is already available to them to try
to data match the unclaimed money to its rightful owner
and fifthly on the foreign Investment fund rule changes.
So we support the introduction of the revenue account method
as a step towards modernizing the fifth regime.
While these rules mainly affect individuals,
our members support reforms that help attract, you know,
skilled talent globally to come to New Zealand.
We also support broader reform of the fifth regime,
including raising the de minimis threshold
and reviewing related rules.
So we look forward to engaging
with officials on the second stage
of the fifth regime review.
I'll now pass on to Patrick to comment on a few other items
that are not currently included in the bill.
Yeah, so look, just, just quickly, two things
that aren't in the bill that we, we think are,
are worthy of, um, further work.
First is SBT reform. Um, why is SBT reform necessary?
There is a review of the FBT system done by Inland Revenue
that basically said a whole heap
of people don't comply with it.
Mm-hmm. And as soon as you make compliance voluntary
and you don't enforce it, then
that's a slippery slope, right?
So, and why don't people comply with the F PT rules?
Because they are complicated.
They, the compliance costs heavy.
And as Vivian said, if you're trying to tell people
that they have to pay tax on the hard hat,
that's just you've, you've lost,
you've lost the plot, right?
Mm-hmm. There is, people are just not going to do that.
And that's actually enables other people who don't want
to comply to say, well, if I'm not gonna pay
that, and it's a slippery slope.
So you've got to get back to what FBT is about,
which is about taxing perks, right?
Mm-hmm. Um, so we, we were really encouraged
by the officials, um, work in this area earlier in the year,
and we would encourage officials
and I think if, if the committee can lend their support
to encourage officials to continue to look at getting back
to what this is about, it's tax perks.
The second thing that's not in the bill,
but hopefully, you know, we, we continue to talk
to officials on it, is some reform which is really
necessary for our infrastructure.
And this is around thin cap without getting,
I know it's eight 30 on a Wednesday morning. Oh,
Patty, Oh yeah.
Help us out here. Yeah, I know Barb, you love it.
Um, we got to remove barriers to stop, um,
some of the taxpayers that are stopping people investing in
the infrastructure we need.
The short answer is we want reform to our fb uh, our,
our thin cap rules to allow, it's a really simple concept.
If I pay interest on a third party loan to a bank,
I should really get a tax deduction for that, right?
You know what? Our rules currently stop that.
And so we've gotta get back to get to back to, to sort
of the basics of allowing a tax system to actually,
and not, not hamper investment.
And so there's some reforms that we've been working through
with officials, you know, hopefully if, if things go well,
we might even see an amendment to this bill.
Um, and we, we we're very happy if, if you wanted us
to come back to talk to about that.
We are encouraged by the, the direction of those reforms.
We think they're gonna be necessary
and they're gonna be a good thing for New Zealand.
So again, if the opportunity comes, we'd encourage, um,
members of the committee to engage in that
and we'd be happy to come back.
Very good. Okay. I'm gonna go to the honor five
Redmonds. Thanks. Um,
thanks Patrick. Thanks Vivian.
And, um, thank you for reminding me of my Fraggle rock
as SB bank account.
Vivian, I can't remember when it was open.
I think it was five, but, um,
I can understand the ities of those questions.
So I agree with your submission.
Um, Patrick two, the, uh, thin cap
and the infrastructure, um, the discussion paper.
Can you take me through why option two is the more favored,
uh, approach by the group?
Yeah, so, so option one is we define infrastructure
and we say this is stuff we like.
And it's only that. The problem with that is we have
to define what infrastructure is.
And I was sitting in a, in a, in a, in a, um, tax conference
and, and pitch was put up
and everyone said, what's infrastructure?
And everyone disagreed.
You know, it is, it is fiber infrastructure,
it's social housing infrastructure.
So we have to define it. We get these boundary issues.
What option two basically says is leave that to the market
to decide if the third party banker is prepared to fund
that on a nonrecourse only limited recourse basis.
That's okay, right? So don't,
don't tie yourself from definitions
because you're always gonna get boundary issues
and boundary issues to stand up with hard decisions
and people are gonna fall left and right.
Our attitude is very much let the market decide,
and if the third party banker is prepared to bank that on a,
on a nonrecourse basis, then that's arm's length, right?
They're not going to do it
unless they actually think that's sustainable.
So it's not substitute for equity.
So that's what we like why we like option two.
And if, if, for example, option one, which was
where the boundary issues are with infrastructure, if
that was proceeded through a, an an amendment paper
during committee of the whole, would you still be supportive
of option one or do you think that would, we've
Gotta take what we can get, um, so
Get something Rather, we'd rather get something and
and, and iron out the rough edges on it.
And I think what's really important is
that those rough edges do have some ironing out
or what is infrastructure and, and some boundary issues.
So even allowing some somewhat malleable rules there
that would allow, you know, so
Some sort of regulation, like some
Regulation. So if we wanted
define, okay, you know,
if 20 years ago we were talking about
fiber, it would've known, right?
Yeah, that's right. We wouldn't have got
through COVID without that, right?
And so you've got, you've got to, you've gotta be malleable
and allow technology to adapt.
Cool. Thanks Patrick. Okay. Right.
We'll have to leave it at that. Thank
You Patrick. Thanks
Patrick. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you.
Right. That takes us to Deloitte New Zealand.
We've got, um, partner Robin Walker here.
Good morning. Um, so I just wanted to say upfront
that I think overall this is a really good bill with lots
of common sense initiatives, uh,
which ultimately will reduce compliance costs
for a lot of taxpayers.
And that's something that I really, uh, try to push for, uh,
whenever I'm looking at tax policy.
Um, so there are a lot of items that are remedial in this,
in this bill and IRD has a remedial policy log, uh,
of issues that they need to address,
which is 37 pages long at the moment.
So it's good to see some progress made on, on that list.
Um, and I suspect you'll see some in the next bill as well.
Um, we did comment on most things in the bill in our
submission, but I'll just touch on a few things.
Um, but maybe just to start with is that the key thing
for the finance and expenditure committee to think about is,
are the words in this bill clear
and can people understand them?
Is it clear what Parliament's intent is?
And maybe just to har back to
what the corporate taxpayers group, uh, just said is
that 40 years ago when FBT was introduced,
does anybody in this room think
that parliament would've intended
that a hard hat was a benefit that should be taxed?
And I would say absolutely not.
That should never have been taxed.
And so to end up in a situation 40 years later
where people's interpretation of
what a benefit is has strange so far
that a hard hat is a benefit
that we now need to think about.
Oh, we need to build a specific exclusion to make sure
that the hard hat isn't subject to FBT is just, you know,
it just sort of illustrates, uh,
why it's really unclear important
that in like your FEC report and in the HA hand side
and everything, it's clear this is what we're trying
to do with those things.
And so there are a couple, in addition
to the hard hat issue, which isn't in the bill,
there are a couple of other things.
So for example, there's this change
for GST and joint ventures.
Now joint ventures have been dealing with GST, some
of these joint ventures have been around for decades,
like three, four decades doing everything.
They haven't changed anything since GS T's been introduced.
The joint venture, the joint venture members,
they all take care of their own GST.
Um, and there's a clear way to interpret that in the laws
and there hasn't been an issue.
But then IRD came along last year
and cited, oh, the law doesn't work like that.
And so what we see in this bill is a change which has 26
changes to the GST Act to get us back to
what people have been doing since GST was introduced.
It's just, it's, there's a problem going on in terms of some
of the interpretations that IRD has been taken, the same
as the example where Inland Revenue decided
that gift cards should be subject
to PAYE rather than FBT when it's always been put
through FBT.
It's just creating issues which the good folk
behind us then have to solve.
And then it just adds more
and more complexity to the legislation.
Yeah, so we are, you know,
if you look at the bill submissions, it's a whole lot
of going backwards and forwards in terms of,
well actually does this fix for gift cards even work?
It's, we shouldn't even be discussing it at all.
It shouldn't be an issue.
Um, so yeah, key is really important
that the legislation is clear about what its purpose is.
Um, the next thing I wanted to touch on is a couple of the,
sort of the, the headline changes in the bill.
So you've got the foreign Investment Fund Revenue Account
method, uh, changes.
So that's the, the fifth ram.
I know you have Tax Loves and acronym.
Um, and we've also got the employee share scheme deferral.
So the ESS rules.
Now those are really good intentions behind those and,
and from our, um, dealings with the minister and,
and talking about what they're trying to achieve,
it's actually really good.
Uh, but when you look at the legislation,
it becomes overly prescriptive.
And so the key issue is, is all of the different
boundary issues that are being put into the legislation,
making it too difficult for anybody
to actually be able to apply it.
If you can't, if people can't apply it,
then the whole thing is a waste of time.
So I would encourage you to look at, um, those rough edges
that I know other submitters have raised, uh, on those, um,
just on some other changes in the bill, uh,
really support the, um, tax exemption
for solar panels on houses, um, just installed solar panels.
Uh, so I'll be glad to not have to put it in my tax return.
However, there is a complication
because it's designed for natural persons.
So if you've got a, a trust which owns a house
that has solar panels, potentially
this concession doesn't apply to the trust
and they will need to go through a process of working out,
uh, first of all, how much did they get from the grid
for their solar that they've sold?
And then work out all the deductions,
what's the depreciation on the solar panels, you know,
what are all the different costs
that I can claim associated with that?
So I think it would be better if it was just a one rule
for solar panels on a residential house
would be a lot simpler.
Um, but it is really great to see that there's no, uh,
upper limit on that.
It was proposed that there would be a cap
of a thousand dollars of income if you flipped over that.
So you earned $1,001, you'll be taxed on the whole amount.
I mean the taxes sort of here, neither ahead nor there.
It's not gonna be a large amount. Yeah.
But it's the compliance costs of suddenly having to get all
that data to work out well,
what should my depreciation have been in previous years
to work out, uh, what the current year depreciations is?
So, um, I think that could be widened. That would be good.
Um, the next thing is the trust disclosure rules.
And these were brought in a few years ago,
and I would hate to think how much time
and energy has been wasted considering these rules.
I know at Deloitte we have spent tens of hours
on just training to try to explain what the rules are
for the people that have to do those tax returns
many, many hours.
So much time explaining to clients
why we need this obscure information.
And it's like, well, it has to go in a box.
We don't know why the information is needed.
Um, the rules have been in place for a couple of years, um,
so people have now collected a lot of the information.
Probably the key thing is that with the repeal of the rules,
it does say it's intended that IRD will still collect, uh,
information from trusts under their existing powers.
So the key issue there is just what is
that data going to be?
And taxpayers just wanna know it's gonna be these data
points and it's not gonna chop and change every year
because every time you change a data point that you want,
everybody has to relearn the rules
and develop new systems, update their it,
it is just a massive hassle.
So, uh, we just wanna see certainty about
what the data should be.
Um, next thing is Investment Boost remedials
and we are supportive of investment boost.
Um, one of the key questions that we get is
around commercial property.
So that does qualify for Investment Boost
and we think that is great.
Um, one of the things is just, it would be great
to get some more examples
and clarity around a scenario
where a property developer has built a building
that they want to sell.
Uh, and there's just, you know, because of the market
or whatever, there's a delay in them being able
to sell the building so
that they rent it out In the interim, it's always held
as their trading stock.
So we think it is clear that they get, uh, investment boost,
or sorry that ultimate purchaser will be able
to claim investment boost on that.
The issue is, is there's just a little bit of uncertainty.
There's no clear examples around this thing.
So, and so that just asks, the vendor then asks a lot
of questions they have to get tax advice,
tax advisors get nervous, they don't want to get sued
if they, you know, they lose the ability to claim it
because I already comes along
and interprets sometime in the future.
Oh, we don't think the words say that.
So, um, it would be good to get more clarity there.
Um, and then, uh, I'll just touch on the FBT changes.
So intention is good, uh,
just a bit more finessing, uh, is needed.
Um, the other thing I just wanted to say
and to reiterate the point that Patrick made is
that it would be good to see reform of the FBT rules.
Uh, I do a lot of FBT work
and at least once a week I have a conversation with a client
that's, uh, wants to know where did those great rules
for motor vehicles get to.
I was really looking forward to them
and we have to say, well, it's sort
of in nowhere's land at the moment.
We are not sure where they are.
So it would be really good to get, uh,
motor vehicle FBT rules reformed.
Um, one of the things that, uh,
people were particularly looking forward with those rules is
that it was to neutralize the taxation of a vehicle, uh,
based on what type of vehicle it is, the rules were going
to move to, how is the vehicle used?
So currently we have a situation where, uh, there's a view
used Utes, Utes, Utes are able to be a work related vehicle.
And yes, they can if all of the rules are followed,
but an electric vehicle can never be a a
a a work-related vehicle.
And so what what we've seen over a long time is
that people want to electrify their fleets,
but the, as soon as you do that,
you get this massive FBT cost, even when it's a work vehicle
that's only, you know, it has restricted use.
So if we could reform those rules, we'd be able
to see employers really increase their EV fleets,
which then will, you know,
result in secondary market EVs. Yeah, we might
Just have to leave it at that Robin,
'cause we're on a hard finish, but I'm gonna go to Barbara
Edmonds. Just,
uh, just back to your earlier comment, Robin, around,
um, IRD uh, interpretations changing, which are now leading
to more remedials or a, a backlog of remedials changed.
Why do you think that is? Is this kind of a historical thing
or are you starting to see a trend
of a bit more aggressive interpretation?
We're definitely seeing it come up more often.
Um, so one thing I would definitely say is
that if there is reform, always start
with a purpose provision.
Like what is it that we are trying to achieve here?
And then hopefully that will like help people get into the
right frame of mind when they're reviewing it.
I mean, and again, I mean I think that's kind of a
service delivery end, if I could put it that way,
an operational end.
Do you think that the service delivery given, um,
there is a lot more auditing happening at the moment
and a lot more compliance work being undertaken by IRD,
do you think that this will kind of start to increase, um,
a bit more of, I mean is there a better way
to do this rather than having to come to a bill
and the select committee had to make those clarifications?
I mean, have you had those conversations
with the commissioner or, um, the team around?
We've definitely raised those in our submissions. Um, okay.
So yeah, that's, sorry.
And then the last question around the fifth rule changes,
um, my, when I look at basically just at a high level,
uh, didn't need a regulatory impact statement,
it's being funded out of the envelope,
the tax policy work program for schools.
But in my intention, it looks like it's not going far enough
as to what the policy intent was
by the minister when I've heard him speak and,
and our support for some of those rule changes.
Do you think it's going as far enough as it needs to?
No, it definitely could go further.
And there's lots of like ins and outs
and as soon as you've got somebody that's like,
oh, should I come to New Zealand?
And then they get hit with this wall
of if you do this, it's fine.
But if you do that, you know, you fall out of the rules.
Um, what are these non-residents are wanting is to just come
to New Zealand and they just wanna pay tax once they're
happy to pay tax on their capital gains,
on their foreign investments.
'cause they're used to it. But how our rules work realize,
realized though, yeah, we are having an unrealized tax
and for a lot of people, if they're high net worth,
that number comes astronomical
and you're just like, well, new Zealand's a nice place,
but it's not that nice.
Yeah, I can go somewhere else and not deal with this.
Thanks Ryan. Yep. So I guess maybe the rationale on the Riz,
and I haven't looked at it, um, in any detail is,
is there a fiscal cost
because the actual, the people won't come here, so this is
to Yeah, just doesn't cost anything.
Just saying is the opposite the minister's intending.
Okay. Yeah. Thank,
Thank you. Thank you so much. And
we're gonna go
to main weather roll problem.
Thank you. Morning gentlemen.
Sorry we're against the clock, but No, no. Um, look,
Um, thank you very much. We were
late. We foolishly followed directions wrong,
so Yeah.
Um, so my name's Chris Ker.
I'm presenting with, uh, Brendan Brown,
who's a tax partner at Main.
We're both tax partners at Maine Witherall.
Um, we are gonna be submitting on two aspects
of our written submission, which you got in front of you.
Um, the first is non-res contract tax, which I'll speak to.
And the other is, um, 17 gb, which re will speak to.
So look on non-resident contractors tax.
Um, I guess by way of background it, so withholding tax on,
um, the payments for services performed in New Zealand
or the use of property in New Zealand.
It was brought in in the 1980s, uh, focused on the, um,
contractors coming over for the think big, uh, projects
who would come here
and then maybe leave without paying their tax.
The the amendment is deal dealing in clause 95 6 is dealing
with whether the withholding tax could theoretically apply
to payments for software as a service.
Um, or similar online services.
So you've got a New Zealand business paying an non-resident
to access an online, um,
say payroll system or something like that.
And everyone seems to agree
that withholding tax shouldn't bite in that scenario.
Um, the provider's not really doing anything in New Zealand.
They won't in most cases have any tax
liability in New Zealand.
Um, if there was NRCT, it would be refunded to them
the concern we have.
And so we agree that, that it shouldn't bite is with the way
that the proposed solution is, um, drafted,
is we've gotta express carve out for software as a service,
platform as a service and infrastructure as a service.
And those terms aren't defined in the legislation,
nor in the bill commentary.
And what worries us is it's quite narrow and label driven
and I just wonder whether someone picking up
that legislation or five or 10 years
or indeed even now, would know what structure
as a service actually, uh, is.
Um, it also raises the question, well
what about other online offerings that aren't
what you'd think of as software as a service?
Say if you're paying subscription fees, um,
to rent a movie online
or, um, for online music subscription that seems
to raise the same concern
but isn't caught by this express exclusion.
Which raises the question well, is that in fact subject
between RCT given we've now got this change?
Good point. There's also an exclusion for SaaS
that involves infrastructure in New Zealand
and um, that probably just adds to the uncertainty
because if you think of a SaaS provider that maybe, um,
puts their data through a cache in New Zealand
or routes it through New Zealand servers, does
that involve infrastructure in New Zealand?
That's really the, some of the uncertainty
that's driven the need for this, um, clarification.
And by having the exclusion in that way, it really, um,
doesn't answer the uncertainty at all.
It just poses the question people have been grappling with.
So look, we see this as a useful first step.
Um, I think it's quite important though
that if it does go in, in this form, uh,
that there is clear commentary saying
that it's just codifying what's the existing position,
which is that NRCT is really only trying to apply
to things which are physically done in New Zealand
or property physically used in New Zealand.
Um, I also wanted to take the opportunity just
to make I guess a more general comment about NRCT.
Uh, we're aware that NRCT is on the work program
that was recently released.
Um, it, it is a tax which causes a lot of friction
for New Zealand businesses that are looking
to bring expertise into the country,
including in respective structured projects.
There's really two key issues with it.
The first is that the relief from withholding
isn't given at source.
Even if you've got, uh,
protection from the tax under a double tax treaty,
new Zealand's negotiated with the other country,
that doesn't mean you can, you can't pick up the treaty
and know that you don't have withholding tax, which a lot
of non-residents expect.
They have to go through quite a cumbersome exemption
certificate application or apply for a refund
after the tax has been withheld.
The second is that we are pushing all of the compliance
and risk onto the New Zealand businesses that are trying
to bring in this expertise rather than inland revenue
exercising its own enforcement functions to collect the tax.
And the question that I would say suggests we all ask
ourselves well when, when this exercise is undertaken is,
do we actually still need NRCT in its current form?
The world has changed since the 1980s.
Um, we've got, uh, better information, better systems.
We've got a big range of mutual enforcement treaties.
I think now is a good time
to be asking whether there's a more modern approach
for dealing with these issues
that fits the modern era rather than
what we had in the 1980s.
The previous reforms that were looked at a few years ago
and parked were, um, more just tinkering.
Um, so that's it on NRCT.
Um, and look, I'll just briefly speak to 17 gb.
I realize this is one of the controversial, um,
aspects of this bill.
We do support the repeal.
The perspective we bring is slightly different from the
perspectives that have been brought so far,
which have focused on a trade off between need
for information and privacy interests of taxpayers.
The perspective we bring is the utmost importance
of protecting the political neutrality
of our enforcement agencies, including revenue.
We know we're very fortunate in New Zealand that relative
to international standards, we are perceived
to have a politically neutral public service.
I think we probably would all agree that that is essential.
The thing about 17 GB is it would allow
and did allow inland revenue to request information, uh,
by compulsion of law untethered
to an existing standard, right?
So people accept that inland revenue has, you know,
very far reaching, uh, get information gathering powers.
Um, but traditionally those have been to ensure
that we are complying with our legal obligations, right?
It's anchored in the object of standard of existing law.
What 17 GB does is it says
that inland revenue can request information with a view
to policy development with a view to thinking about
what the law should be.
And in the one instance in which it's been exercised, uh,
which was the, the so-called high wealth, uh,
individual's project, it was very apparent in terms
of the perception that that was being driven
by the Minister of the day.
And, uh, our submission is that that fundamentally changes
the way that inland revenue is perceived,
puts inland revenue in a very difficult, uh, position
because from the taxpayer's perspective, they're being asked
to provide information, not
to check whether they're complying with law, uh,
but to further a political objective of, in
that case a particular, uh, minister.
And we're concerned that that's a slippery slope,
that we should not go down for that reason.
We think it should be repealed if the information is needed.
Uh, then we think
that someone like Stats New Zealand is the better body
to collect it, take it away from the, the, um,
revenue enforcement agency.
Okay. Uh, honorable Barbara,
I'm sorry, really quickly 'cause the bell's ringing.
Brendan. Um, how does the repeal section for GV reconcile
with the new changes in the bill
around the information sharing, which
goes away from primary legislation
down to ministerial level?
Um, look, I see those as, as, as two separate issues.
Although of course the more information sharing you have,
the more careful you have to be about the gateways for
that information being collected because you could have
A, to be harder on crime rather than soft on crime
and then seeking information from
Yep. But again, that,
that would be for law enforcement,
which is quite different from gathering information
to further a particular viewpoint
about what the law should be. Cool. Thanks Brendan.
Okay, thank you very much. We will suspend this meeting
and uh, reform of one o'clock
for more hearings on the taxation.
Thank you. Thanks. Mm-hmm.